Agence France-Presse (AFP) is now delivering breaking news stories and long-form journalism in English on the Bloomberg Terminal. Based in Paris, AFP is known around the world for its rapid, reliable, and complete coverage of general news, politics, global business and finance. “This arrangement is another valuable recognition of the quality work done by AFP journalists around the world” said Phil Chetwynd, global news director for AFP.
	
	“We remain focused on the continued addition of global news sources like AFP to the Bloomberg Terminal,” said Ted Merz, Global Head of News Product at Bloomberg. “Providing our clients with real-time news and information through our aggregated news services delivers valuable intelligence to help support their strategies.”
	
	AFP has journalists in 151 countries, producing original multi-media content in English, French, Spanish, German, Portuguese and Arabic.
	
	Along with its regional HQs in cities such as Hong Kong and Washington, it also has staff operating from permanent bureaus in capitals such as Kabul, Tehran and Pyongyang where virtually every other news organization is absent.
	
	Despite its European roots, it has carved out a reputation for its boots-on-the-ground reporting in some of the most neglected parts of the world – in particular in Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
	
	It was the first independent media organization to enter Ethiopia’s northern Tigray region after conflict erupted there in November 2020 with a government offensive to topple the regional ruling party. AFP scooped the top prize in the News category in last week’s Rory Peck awards for its video coverage of the conflict.
	
	In build-up to the recent COP26 summit in Glasgow, it commissioned dozens of long-form reportages, including sending a team of text, photo and video journalists into the heart of the Amazon where they spent a month chronicling the impact of climate change on the world’s largest rainforest. Another team travelled to the Arctic in Sweden’s far north to describe the potentially devastating impact for the planet as permafrost melts below the earth’s surface.
	
	Its reputation for delivering straight news without bias has won it a wide-ranging client base around the world and it has also become an industry leader for fact-checking, as well as a major actor on digital verification, part of the battle against online disinformation.